---
layout: single
title: "Notes on Designing Data-Intensive Applications: Chapter 5 Replication"
date: 2018-08-19 17:54 -0700
categories: "software-engineering"
mathjax: true
---

## Introduction
- Reasons for replication:
  - Store data closer to users to reduce latency.
  - Improve availability.
  - Scale throughput
- The challenge is not storing the data, but handling changes to replicated data.
- There are three popular algorithms: single-leader, multi-leader, and leaderless replication.
- Tradeoffs to consider include asynchronous vs. synchronous replication and how to handle failures.

## Leaders and Followers
- Each node that stores a copy of the data is called a replica.
- Leader-based replication works as follows: the leader takes write requests, writes to its local storage, and sends the data change to followers as part of a replication log or change stream. Each follower then applies the change in the same order as they were processed on the leader. Clients can then read from any replica.

### Synchronous and Asynchronous Replication


| | Synchronous | Asynchronous |
| --- | --- | --- |
| A leader waits for confirmation from all followers before reporting success to clients | Yes | No |
| Followers always have a latest copy of database | Yes | No |
| Can process writes when one follower is down | No | Yes |
| Writes are durable | Yes | No |

### Setting Up New Followers
- To set up new followers, take a snapshot of the leader and copy the snapshot to the follower. Connect the follower to the leader, request the backlog of data changes and apply them.

### Handling Node Outages
- Outages can be caused by planned maintenace or hardware faults.

#### Follower failure: Catch-up recovery
- A follower can easily catch up since it knows the last transaction it processed. A follower can request the change logs during its down time and catch up.
#### Leader Failuer: Failover
- If a leader fails, a follower has to be promoted to a leader, and clients need to send write requests to the new leader. The major steps are as follows:
  - Determining that the leader has failed, through periodic pings.
  - Choosing a new leader, through appointment or election. A good canadidate is a one with the most up-to-date data changes.'
  - Reconfigure the system to use the new leader. Clients need to send data to the new leader. The old leader needs to step down when coming back.
- A few issues that may arise during a failover:
  - The new leader may not have the latest writes, and when the old leader comes back, it may have conflicting writes. The most common solution is to discard the old leader's writes.
  - Discarding writes could be dangerous if other databases relys on the discarded data.
  - When the old leader comes back, we may have two leaders (split brain). This is dangerous since we don't have mechanisms to resolve conflicts.
  - A timeout too short may result in unnecessary failover.

### Implementation of Replication Logs
#### Statement-based replication
- The leader forwards the exactly write request, such as the SQL write query, directly to followers.
- Issues are:
  - Any nondeterministic functions such as NOW() and RAND() is going to have different values in each replica.
  - Queries may need to be applied in the same order, such as queries that write to autoincrementing columns.
  - Queries with side effects may result in different side effects in each replica.

#### Write-ahead log (WAL) shipping
- The leader writes a WAL to disk and send the WAL to followers.
- Replication is closely coupled with the storage engine. WALs may not be parsable if the software version between the leader is different from the followers.

#### Logical (row-based) log replication
- A logical log is a sequence of records describing writes to database tables at a row level.
- A transaction may generate multiple entries in the log.
- The logical log is decoupled from the storage engine internals.
- It is easier for external applications (such as a data warehouse) to parse the logs.

#### Trigger-based replication
- A trigger registers application code that is executed when a write transaction occurs in a database. The trigger can write the data to a separate table, which can then be read by an external process and replicated to another system.
- Trigger-based replication typically has greater overheads.

## Problems with Replication Lag
- A single-leader replication system makes sense when write QPS is low and read QPS is high. The capacity can be improved by adding more followers with an asynchronous replication scheme. However, not all reads are guaranteed to be up-to-date. Yet, we know the followers will eventually catch up. This is called eventual consistency.

### Reading Your Own Writes
- We need *read-after-write* consistency or *read-your-writes* consistency. This guarantees that if the user reloads the page, the user will see the data they submitted, yet other users may still see a staled version of the data.
- Solutions:
  - Route read requests from users who recently updated the database to the leader. For example, read a user's own profile always from the leader.
  - The client can remember the timestamp of its most recent write and ensure all reads to be from replicas that are at least as up-to-date.
  - If replicas are distributed across data centers. All write requests must be routed to the datacenter with the leader. 
  - If a user may have logged in from multiple devices, we can use a separate service to reecord the last updated time.
  - If replicas are distributed across data centers, it's not guaranteed that all devices are connected to the same data center. We need to ensure we route all connections to the same datacenter.

### Monotonic Reads
- Monotonic reads guarantees that if a user make several reads in sequence, they will not see time to go backward.
- This can be done by ensuring consecutive reads are served by the same replica.

### Consistent Prefix Reads
- Consisten prefix reads guarantees that if a sequence of writes happened in a specific order, all reads will see the appear in the same order.
- One solution is to ensure write causually related are written to the same partition.

### Solutions for Replication Lag
- Transactions are designed to provide stronger guarantees for applications.

## Multi-Leader Replication
- In single-leader replication, if a client for some reason can't connect to the leader, the client can't write to the database.

### Use Cases for Multi-Leader Replication
#### Multi-datacenter operation
- In multi-datacenter databases, a single-leader must live on one of the datacenters, making writes from clients far away from the datacenter slow.
- Each datacenter can have their own leader, where changes are replicated to leaders in other datacenters.
- When a datacenter goes down, a single-leader system will need to failover, while a multi-leader system can continue to operate.
- A single-leader database is sensitive to inter-datacenter connection issues, which is less reliable. A temporary network interruption does not prevent writes to be processed in a multi-leader database.
- The main challenge is to resovle conflicts when some data is concurrently modified in two datacenters.
#### Clients with offline operation
- Multi-leader replication is also useful for applications that needs to continue working when offline.
- One can view the local device as a database with a leader that can take writes even when the device is offline.

#### Collaborative editing
- We can view each local copy of a document in a real-time collaborative editing application as a leader. Changes are instantly applied to the local database and replicated to other databases. To guarantee no conflicts, we need to apply lock the document before a user edits it and unlock it after the change is committed. Ideally the unit of change should be small.
- Offline editing will still require conflict resolution.

### Handling Write Conflicts
#### Synchronous versus asynchronous conflict detection
#### Conflict avoidance
#### Converging toward a consistent state
#### Custom conflict resolution logic
#### What is a conflict
### Multi-Leader Replication Topologies
## Leaderless Replication
### Writing to the Database When a Node Is Down
#### Read repair and anti-entropy
#### Quorums for reading and writing
### Limitations of Quorum Consistency
#### Monitoring staleness
### Sloppy Quorums and Hinted Handoff
#### Multi-datacenter operation
### Detecting Concurrent Writes
#### Last write wins (discarding concurrent writes)
#### The "happens-before" relationship and concurrency
#### Capturing the happens-before relationship
#### Merging concurrently written values
#### Version vectors





Summarized from [Designing Data-Intensive Applications](https://dataintensive.net/).